# Development of Flood Forecasting System Using Different Machine Learning Techniques and Comparison with Physically Based Model

Floods are natural disasters caused mainly due to heavy or excessive rainfall. They induce massive economic losses in Bangladesh every year. Physically based flood prediction models have been used over the years where simplified forms of physical laws are used to reduce the complexity of calculations which can lead to an inaccuracy in the prediction. Moreover, a physically based model requires large hydro-geomorphological monitoring datasets, a heavy computational capacity which creates an impediment for quick and accurate short-term prediction. In recent years, researchers have tried different approaches like empirical data-driven models, especially machine learning-based models, to offer an alternative approach to the physically-based models but these studies focused on developing only one machine learning (ML) technique at a time (i.e. ANN, MLP etc.). There are many other techniques, algorithms, and models in machine learning (ML) technology that have the potential to be effective and efficient in flood forecasting. In this study, several state of the art ML algorithms such as : Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), Neuro-Fuzzy, Support Vector Machine (SVM), Support Vector Regression (SVR), Classification and Regression Tree (CART), Decision Tree and EBPNN were used to build independent flood forecasting models for Someshwari-Kangsa sub-watershed of the North Central hydrological region of Bangladesh. Satellite based precipitation, temperature, relative humidity, wind speed and evapotranspiration data were used as input and observed water level data were used as output value. For comparison, the accuracy of these models were evaluated using three statistical indices - Coefficient of determination, Root mean square error (RMSE) and Mean absolute error (MAE). Further, the results of ML models were compared with a calibrated and validated physically based HEC-HMS model of the same study area. Results show that data driven models developed using ML algorithms performed better than physically based HEC-HMS model.


Keywords: Flood Forecasting, Machine Learning, HEC-HMS Model, Someshwari-Kangsa sub-watershed

